# Fast Downward 19.06

Fast Downward 19.06 was released on June 11, 2019.

## Downloads

 * source tarball: [[attachment:fast-downward-19.06.tar.gz||&do=get]]
 * Singularity container: [aibasel/downward:19.06 on Singularity Hub](https://www.singularity-hub.org/collections/3944)
 * Docker container: [aibasel/downward:19.06 on Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/aibasel/downward)
 * Vagrantfile: [[attachment:Vagrantfile||&do=get]] for Fast Downward 19.06

For Singularity, Docker and Vagrant, see QuickStart for instructions on how to run the planner. That page explains how to run the latest release of Fast Downward, so you have to amend the instructions if you want to run an older release.

For the tarball, if you have satisfied all dependencies, the following should build and run the planner with configuration alias `lama-first` on PDDL files `/path/to/domain.pddl` and `/path/to/problem.pddl` on a Linux or macOS system:

``` bash
tar -xvzf fast-downward-19.06.tar.gz
cd fast-downward-19.06
./build.py
./fast-downward.py --alias lama-first /path/to/domain.pddl /path/to/problem.pddl
```

For dependencies and more advanced information (including Windows builds), see [the build instructions](https://github.com/aibasel/downward/blob/main/BUILD.md).

## Limitations

For licensing reasons, features related to LP solvers are unavailable in the released version if you use Docker, Singularity or Vagrant. We hope to improve integration of LP solvers into the releases in the future.

The source tarball release will use an LP solver if it has been appropriately configured at build time.
See [LP build instructions](https://github.com/aibasel/downward/blob/main/BUILD.md#optional-linear-programming-solvers) for more information.

## Referencing Fast Downward 19.06

If you use this version of Fast Downward in a scientific publication, we encourage you to mention the version number, as in
"We ran experiments with Fast Downward 19.06." The canonical reference for citing Fast Downward is the following journal paper:

```
@Article{helmert-jair2006,
  author =  "Malte Helmert",
  title =   "The {Fast} {Downward} Planning System",
  journal = "Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research",
  year =    "2006",
  volume =  "26",
  pages =   "191--246"
}
```

## Changes in Fast Downward 19.06

Prior to Fast Downward 19.06, Fast Downward did not have official releases. Instead, we encouraged users to directly track the project repository. For this reason, we do not provide a change log here. Future releases of Fast Downward will include a list of changes since the last release.

